__--

-_

-_.-

Constructivism

in Computer

.._ “.---~

Science Education

Mordechai Ben-Ari
Department of Science Teaching
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 76100 Israel
ntbenari@wis.weizmann.ac.il

Boxer system was specifically designed on constructivist principles ([2], p. 12). However, I could not find
articles on constructivism in computer science education comparable with the vast literature in mathematics
and physics education.

Abstract
Constructivism is a theory of learning which claims that
students construct knowledge rather than merely receive and store knowledge transmitted by the teacher.
Constructivism has been extremely influential ‘in science and mathematics education, but not in computer
science education (CSE). This paper surveys constructivism inthe context of CSE, and shows how the theory
can supply a theoretical basis for debating issues and
‘,
evaluating proposals.

Epistemology and Constructiyism
An educational ‘paradigm is composed of four coms ,
ponents [5]:
l

l

Introduction
The dominant theory of learning today is called consyuctivism. This theory claims that knowledge’ is
actively constructed by the student, not passively absorbed from textbooks and lectures. Since the construction builds recursively on knowledge (facts, ideas
and beliefs) that the student already has, each student
will construct an idiosyncratic version of knowledge.
Teaching techniques derived from the theory of constructivism are supposed to be more successful than
traditional techniques, because they explicitly address
the inevitable process of knowledge construction.
Constructivism has been intensively studied for more
than a decade by researchers of science education [fl
and mathematics education [l]. This article will first
survey constructivism and its application in science
education; then I will assessits relevance for CSE and
offer some examples of the application of the theory.

l

l

An ontology which is a theory of existence.
An epistemology which is a theory of knowledge,
both of knowledge specific to an individual. and of
shared human knowledge.
A methodology for acquiring and validating knowledge.
A pedagogy which is a theory of teaching.

We can use this framework to describe the classical
educational paradigm:
i:
There. is an ontological reality. The Newtonian
model of absolute space and time is the model of
reality we use in ,practice, and we are Platonists who
hold that mathematics has an independent existence.
l

l

l

Previous Work

Epistemology isfoundational. The truth is out there.
Through empirical experiences we can discover absolutely true foundations, and use valid forms of
logical deduction to expand true knowledge.
The mind is a clean’ slate that can be filled with
transmitted knowledge.

. Listening to lectures and reading books are the primary means of knowledge transmission. Repetition
will ensure that the knowledge is retained.

There is a large literature on the psychology of programming ([17], [lOI), and many of these researchers
clearly hold constructivist views. For example, the

The constructivist paradigm is dramatically different:

Permissionto makedigitaLhardcopiesof all or part of this materialfor
personalor doom
useis grantedwithout fee providedthat the copies
arenot madeor distributedfor profit or commercialadvantage,the copyl'@UOtb%,
the title oftbe publicationand its dateappear,endnoticeis
giventhat copyrightis by permissionof the &%I, Inc. To copy otherwise,
to republish,to poston serversor to redistributeto lists,requiresspecific
permissionylflorfee.

SIGSCE 98 AthntaGA

i

l

l

USA

Ontological reality is at best irrelevant. Since we
can never truly ‘know’ anything, ontology cannot
influence our educational paradigm.
The epistemology of constructivism is nonfiundationalist and fallible. Absolute truth is unattainable,

Copyright 1998O-89791-99’~7/98/2..$5.00

257

4

not as a mistake, but as a logical construction based
on consistent, though non-standard concepts, held by
the student. Misconceptions form the prior knowledge
that is essential to the construction of new knowledge [16]. Merely listing misconceptions is fruitless; a
description of the underlying model and a prescription
for constructing a modified one must be given.

so there is no foundation of truth on which to build.
Knowledge is constructed by each individual and
thus necessarily fallible.
. Knowledge is acquired recursively: sensory. data is
combined with existing knowledge to create new
cognitive structure& which are in turn the basis for’
further construction. Knowledge is also created
cognitively by reflecting on existing knowledge.1
l

Criticism of Constructivism
Before continuing, we must stress that that there is
opposition to constructivism.2 The criticism is not
so much of. the constructivist theory of learning, but
rather of extreme conclusions drawn from constructivist epistemology. Carried to the extreme, radical constructivism leads t,o solipsism, the philosophical claim
that the world is my own creation or dream. In turn,
this can lead to a rejection of ethics: if the world is
my own creation, why should I care what happens to
others? Carried to the extreme, social constructivism
leads to a view of science as a merely political enterprise developed by entrenched elitist groups whose
main purpose is to ensure their own survival. From
the fallibility of scientific knowledge, one slips into
relativism of truth, and from the sociology of scientific
practice, into demands for empowerment detached
from any attempt at objective evaluation of scientific
knowledge.

Passive learning will likely fail, because each student brings a different knowledge framework to the
classroom, and will construct new knowledge in a
different manner. Learning must be active: the student ‘must construct knowledge assisted by guidance
from’ the teacher and feedback from other students.

The task of the teacher is signifida&ly more difficult
than in the classical paradigm, because .the guidance
must be based on, the understanfling of each student’s
currently existing cognitive structures.
Constructivists differ among themselves as to the relative importance ascribed’ to ‘the individual student?and
to the group ,iq constructing knowledge; these variants are known as ‘radical’ and rsocial constructivism,
respectively. A discussion of #this topic is beyond the
scope of this, article (see [5]).
, ,
_‘, i
Constructivism in Science Education
Studies have, shown that relatively few students reach
an, acceptable level ,of achievement in science and
mathematics [4]. Physics teachers seem to have the
worst time, as students retain a naive theory of physics
despite ‘intensive instruction in’NeCtonian mechanics.
Apparently, these’ ideas are so entrenched that-inere
lectures and even experiments have: a’ difficult time
:I,’
It
evicting”them.
According to constructivism, a teacher cannot ignore
the student’s existing knowledge;’ instead, he or she
must question the student in order .to understand what
models the student possesses,and only then attempt to
guide the student to the ‘correct!, theory. A term that is
commonly used is alternative j?a,me,~$s, meaning that
the students have consistent models-they just happen
to be at variance With the (currently accepted) scientific
theory., Similarly, von Glasersfeld would never say that
a student’s knowledge is ‘wrong’, because he does not
believe in the possibility of ,establishing truth. Instead,,
he says that concepts are viable ‘if they prove adequate
in the contexts in which they were created’ ([20], p. 7).
In most fields of science education (including CSE),
there is a large bbdy of reskarch”that catalogs miscdnceptions. A constructivist’would view a misconception
*’
‘These terms come from the seminal work of &an Piaget 0; the
acquisition of knowledge by children; P&et’s work was instrumental
in the development of constructivist theories.

Empirical Results in CSE
There is no question’that many students find the study
of computer science,extremely difficult, especially at
elementary levels. Before proceeding with a theoretical analysis, I wish to quote some empirical results
that, demonstrate the’depth of the problem:
Sleeman et al. [15] found that the concept of variable
is extremely difficult for students. For example, students taught a ‘box’-metaphor believe that a variable
can simultaneously contain two values. The students
have constructed a’cbnsistent concept, it just happens
to be non-viable fo,f’successful programming.
,?
Madison [9] used extensive interviews to elicit the
internal-non-viable -models of parameters held by
students.
,Holland et al. [8] show the extent of, the misconceptions held by students studying object-oriented
programming.
l

l

l

Constructivism in CSE ’ :
To what extent is constructivism applicable to CSE?
According to constructivism, students construct knowledge by combining the experiential world with existing
‘For more detail see the articles by Matthews, Nola, Phillips and
Ogborn in the Special Issue on Philosophy ahd Constructivism in
Science Education of ScierrceR Educalion,January 1997.

i

cognitive structures. I claim that the application of
constructivism to CSE must take into account two
characteristics that do not appear in natural sciences;
l

A (beginning) CS student has no e&&e

l

model of

a computer.

l

The computer forms an accessibleontological reality.
i
,
,
By ,effective model, I mean a cognitive structure ,that
the student can use to make viable, constructions of
knowledge, based upon sensory experiences, such as
reading, listening, to lectures and working with, a computer. By accessible ontological reality, I mean that a
‘correct’ answer is easily accessible,and moreover, successful performance requires that a normative ,model
of this reality must be constructed.
The following paragraphs expand on these claims.
The naive theory of physics held by students is clearly
effective, but I deny that beginning CS students come
to class with an, effective model of a computer. At
most, the model is limited to, the grossly anthropomorphic ‘giant brain’, hardly a useful metaphor, when
studying computer science. Pea [ll] gives the ,name
‘superbug’ to the idea that a ‘hidden mi,nd’ ,within
the programming language has intelligence. If misconceptions are essential to the construction of new
knowledge [16], the lack, of an effective,, if flawed,
model of a computer is a serious obstacle to, learning
cs.
At the novice level, the”claim is supported by many
studies. Du Boulay ([3], p. 285) notes that 1‘Eveq if
no effort is made to present a view of what is going on
‘inside’ the learners will form their own.” Perkins et al.
([12], p. 162) “attribute students’ fragile knowledge
of programming in considerable part to a lack of a
mental model of the computer.. . .‘I’ Sleeman et al.
([14], p. 251) found that “even :after a full semester of
Pascal,students’ knowledge of the conceptual machine
underlying Pascal can be very fuzzy.”
I
The computer science student is faced with immediate
and brutal feedback on conclusions drawn from his
or her internal model. More graphically,’ altepative
frameworks cause bugs. Computer science is unlike
school physics: intuition and manipulative facility are
not sufficient for passing a course, and the consequences of misconceptions are immediately exposed.
There is not much point in arguing about ‘alternative
frameworks’ of the syntax or, semantics of a programming language. Surely, this is the cause of much
psychological grief experienced by computer science:
students.
l

l

The construction of CS ~concepts is h,aphazard (as
shown by the research cited),.because sensory data
,from class must be integrated into a student’s existing framework that is too superficial.
Frustration and the perception that computer science is ‘hard’ is due to the fact that models must
be self-constructed from the ground up.
Autodidactic programming experience is not necessarily correlated with successin academic CS studies.
These students, like physics students, probably come
with firmly held constructions that are not viable for
academic studies.

. ,The reality feedback obtained by working on a com1puter can be discouraging to students who prefer a
more reflective or social style of learning.
In ‘the rest of the paper, I will apply constructivist
principles to specific issues in’ CSE. The point is not
necessarily to convince you that my analyses and conclusions are correct, but to convince you that constructivism can provide a new and powerful set of concepts
td guide our debates on CSE.
GUI-and WYSIWYG Angst
-,1
Graphical user interfaces (GUI) are often touted as
‘intuitive’ and ‘user-friendly’, yet many new users are
anxiety-ridden. From a constructivist point of view,
this paradox is easily resolved. An icon is just a
representation; it is useful only to the extent that the
user -can ‘construct a mental model of object being
represented.
Consider the icon for a ‘running man’. This represents
the action that ‘iauses the computer to perform the
machine instructions that are obtained by compiling
the source code’. Jargon calls this ‘running a program’.
The icon is thus two steps removed from the action:
first, the icon must be deciphered as representing the
word ‘,‘running’ rather than ‘chasing’ or ‘racing’, and
then this word must be related to a mental model of
the computer.
Icons are intuitive to the extent that the analogy between the object shown and the object represented is
perfect. But as Glynn shows [6], analogies are rarely,
if ever, perfect, so one ‘must not lose patience with a
novice who has yet to construct an efficient model of
the underlying machine.
WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) is
another concept’ that could benefit from some constructivist analysis. Opponents of WYSIWYG often
paraphrase, it sarcastically as ‘what you see is all you
get’, but this misses the point., What you see is not
what you get: what you get is an internal data structure containing your document and a set of operations

Application of Constructivism in CS,
I believe that many phenomena of CSE can be explained by constructivism:
259

Bricolage and Gender

for transforming the ‘data structure; what you see is
merely ’ a visual representation of the structure, and
icons or menus representing the operations. You have
to construct a’ viable model that will enable you to
predict the outcome of any operation on the model,
and to predict ‘how that outcome will be reflected in
the representation you see. The relevance for CSE
is that courses, help files and tutorials must explicitZy
address the construction of ‘a model, and not limit
themselves to behaviorist practices of the form ‘to do
X, follotiing these steps’.
‘,,
i
Explicitly Teach the Model

Bricolage is a term coined by the anthropologist Claude
L&i-Strauss, who used it in a derogatory sense for
the ‘science of the concrete’ in primitive societies, as
opposed to abstract ‘European’ science. Turkle and
Papert [19] transferred the concept to the context of
learning to program, and vehemently defend it as a
learning style as valid as the normative ‘planning’ style
that we attempt to teach.
This is consistent with a constructivist view of education:, different students will approach the construction
of knotiledge in different bays, and the educational
environment must be supportive of these differences,
Certainly, concrete thinking and bricolage can help students in introductory courses. However, I do not think
that bricolage is an effective epistemology for professional programming. A massive amount of detailed
knowledge must be constructed, so it must be organized in levels of abstraction (cf. object-oriented programming), and the normative ‘planning’ style that we
call software engineering ‘must eventually be learned
and practiced.
A manifestation of bricolage in computer science is
endless debugging of the ‘try-it-and-see-what-happens’
variety. A student who exhsively uses such techniques
is ultimately not qualified to work on the software of
embedded and operating systems, which requires the
ability to create and test abstract hypotheses.
Turkle and Papert published their article arguing for
tolerance of concrete’ thinking in a journal subtitled
Women in Culture and SoCiety, and they chose two
women to exemplify college’students who are concrete
thinkers. I believe that the concrete way of thinking
advocated by Turkle and Papert can only go so far in
CS, and that it is inappropriate to couple a learning
style with a gender stereotype.
On the other hand, constructivism -especially social
constructivism-has much to say about the task of
the teacher and the role of peers in education, and
the theory can contribute to the analysis of the welldocumented social difficulties faced by women in the
CS classroom and laboratory.

If the student does not bring a preconceived model
to class, then. we must ensure that a viable hierarchy of models is constructed and refined as learning progresses. This means that the model of a
computer-CPU, memory, I/O peripherals- must be
explicitly taught and discussed, not left to haphazard
construction and not glossed over with facile analogies.
Teaching the’ ,model can be done using : fpistemic games- formalized procedures for constructing
knowledge-such as a model computer [13] or a ‘notional machine’ [3]. From a constructivist perspective,
the appropriate level of an initial model is a matter for
efnpirical research: given that a model of a computer
must be taught, what is the most
‘ b,abstract model that
will be effective.
My conclusion that a,model of the computer be explicitly taught may not be compatible with teaching objects
in introductory courses. Abstraction is essential as a
way of ‘forgetting’ detail, and software development
would be impossible without it, but it seems to me
that there must be an object-oriented paradox: bob
is’ it possible to forget detail that you never knew or
even imagined?
,
I ,appreciate the attractiveness of an objects-first approach; the gap between the standard libraries (especially the GUI libraries) of a modern programming
environment, and the model of a computer is so great
that motivating beginners has become a serious problem, My question is: if students find it difficult to
construct a viable model of variables and parameters, why should we believe that they can construct
a viable model, of an object such as a radio button?
Teachers of introductory courses that use abstractions
must not assume that students will construct the model
that the instructor has. This was demonstrated by
Holland et al. [8], but based on experience in other
disciplines of science education, cataloging and analyzing misconceptions will not be sufficient to improve
students’ understanding.”
%kle

Pedagogical Methods in CSE
Constructivism suggests that programming exercises
should be delayed until class discussion has enabled
the construction of a good model of the computer.
Too often students become infatuated with the absolute ontology supplied by’ the computer; premature
nial to those who favor concrete approaches, but it also puts an
intellectual value on a way of thinking that is resonant with their
own.” ([19] p. 155) This claim is strange, because the point of
studying OOP is to learn td create abstractions, not just to USC
existing objects.

and Papert claim that OOP is “not only more conge-

260

attempts to write programs leads to bricolage and
delays the development of viable models.
Group assignments and closed labs should be, preferable to individual homework exercises, because they
soften the brutality of the interaction with the computer and facilitate the social interaction that is apparently necessary for successful construction; Teachers
and lab assistants should be trained to encourage resection and to prevent the bricolage.
Implications for Research
The science-teaching literature shows that performance is no indication of understanding. CSE research like Madison’s [9], which elicits the internal
structures of the student, is far more helpful than
research that measures performance alone and then
draws conclusions on the success of a technique. A
student’s failure to construct a viable ,mo,del is a failure of the educational process, even if, the ,failure is
not immediately apparent.
As computer literacy becomes commonj if not universal, students will begin their academic studies with an
effective model of a computer. However, I believe
that research must be done to discover if these- models are stepping-stones to the construction of effective
models, or obstacles like naive physics.
i
Acknowledgements
I ,./
I would like to thank Abraham Arcavi, Bat-Sheva
Eylon and Yifat Ben-David Kohkant for their critiques
of the first draft of this paper.

[7l S. M. Glynn, R. H. Yeany, and B. K. Britton, editors. The Psychology of Learning Science.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1991.
[8] S. Holland, R. Griffiths, and M. Woodman.
Avoiding object misconceptions. SIGCSE BuZletin, 29(1):131-134, 1997.
[9] S. K. Madison. A Study of College Students’ Construct of Parameter Passing: Implications for Instruction. PhD thesis, U. of Wisconsin, 1995.
[lo] R. E. Mayer, editor. Teachilig and Learning Computer Programming. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988.
[ll]

R. D. Pea. Language-independent conceptual
1 “bugs” in novice programming. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 2(1):25-36, 1986.

[12] D. Perkins, S. Schwartz, and R. Simmons. Instructional strategies for the problems of novice
programmers. In. Mayer [lo], pages 153-178.
[13]’ L. Sherry. A model computer simulation as an
epistemic game. SIGCSE Bulletin, 3(2):59-64,
1995.
[14] D. Sleeman, R. T Putnam, J. A. Baxter, and
L. Kuspa. An introductory Pascal class: A case
’ study of student errors. In Mayer [lo], pages
237-257.
[15] D. Sleeman, R. ‘T Putnam, J. A. Baxter, and
L. I&pa.
A summary of misconceptions of
high school basic programmers. In Soloway and
Spohrer [17], pages 301-314.

References
[l] R. B. Davis, C. A. Maher, and N. Noddings,
editors. Constructivist Views of the Teaching and
Learning of Mathematics. J. for Research in Mathematics Education. Monograph No. 4. National
Council for the Teaching of Mathematics, 1990.

[16] J. I? Smith III, A. A. disessa, and J. Roschelle.
Misconceptions reconceived: A constructivist
analysis of knowledge in transition. The Journal
of The Learning Sciences,,3(2):115-163, 1993.

[2] A. A. disessa, H. Abelson, and D. Ploger. An
overview of boxer. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10:3-15, 1991.
,)

[17] E. Soloway and J.’ C. Spohrer, editors. Studying the Novice Programmer. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1989.
:

[3] B. du ,Boulay. Some difficulties of learning to
program. In Soloway and Spohrer [17], pages
283-299.

[18] L. F! Steffe and J. Gale, editors. donstructivism in
Education. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1995.

[4] R. Duit. Students’ conceptual frameworks: consequences’for learning science. In Glynn et al.
[7], pages 65-85.

[19] S. Turkle and S. Papert. Epistemological pluralism: Styles and cultures within the computer
culture. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society, 16(1):128-148, 1990.

[5] P Ernest. The one and the many. In Steffe and
Gale [18], pages 459-486.

[20] E. van Glaserseld. A constructivist approach to
- teaching. In Steffe and Gale [18], pages 3-15.

[6] S. M. Glynn. Explaining science concepts: a
teaching-with-analogies model. In Glynn et al.
[7], pages 219-240.
261

